>> Woodruff: U.S. INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS WORK TO IDENTIFY
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS SEEN IN
RECENT VIDEOS AFTER THE
EXECUTION OF AMERICAN AID WORKER
PETER KASSIG.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, WE DIG
DEEP INTO THE HEALTH PROBLEMS
VETERANS SAY ARE CAUSED BY BURN
PITS WHERE EVERYTHING FROM
CHEMICALS TO VEHICLES HAVE BEEN
SET ON FIRE NEAR MILITARY BASES
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN.
>> THERE WAS ROLELY NO PLACE TO
ESCAPE.
THE SMOKE WOULD BLOW ACROSS YOU.
YOU WOULD TURN YOUR BACK TO IT
AND HOPE THAT THE WIND WOULD
CHANGE.
I USED TO RUN FIVE-MINUTE MILES.
NOW I CAN'T WALK DOWN THE BLOCK
WITHOUT BREATHING REAL HEAVY.
>> Woodruff: FEDERAL
INVESTIGATORS' SURPRISE
INSPECTION OF THE NATIONAL
FOOTBALL LEAGUE TO SEE IF ITS
USE OF PRESCRIPTION PAINKILLERS
IS OUT OF BOUNDS.
>> Ifill: PLUS, SCIENTISTS RACE
TO MEASURE THE SIZE OF ALASKA'S
GLACIERS BEFORE THEY DISAPPEAR.
>> MOST GLACIERS IN ALASKA ARE
RETREATING.
WE'D LIKE TO BE ABLE TO PREDICT
WITH BETTER ACCURACY OF WHAT
WILL HAPPEN, BUT IT'S HARD TO
IMAGINE A SCENARIO THERE WHERE
GLACIERS WILL NOT CONTINUE TO
LOSE MASS IN THIS AREA.
THE QUESTION IS HOW FAST?
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: ANOTHER AMERICAN
FAMILY MOURNED TODAY FOR A SON
SLAUGHTERED BY ISLAMIC STATE
KILLERS IN SYRIA.
PETER KASSIG'S DEATH WAS
CONFIRMED OVER THE WEEKEND.
>> OUR HEARTS ARE BATTERED BUT
THEY WILL MEND, THE WORLD IS
BROKEN BUT IT WILL BE HEALED IN
THE END.
>> Ifill: ED AND PAULA KASSIG
APPEARED THIS AFTERNOON IN
INDIANAPOLIS, 24 HOURS AFTER
LEARNING OF THEIR SON'S MURDER.
MRS. KASSIG QUOTED ONE OF HIS
TEACHERS.
>> IN 26 YEARS, HE HAS WITNESSED
AND EXPERIENCED FIRST HAND, MORE
THAN MOST OF US CAN IMAGINE.
OF THE HARSH REALITIES OF LIFE
AND EXPERIENCED FIRST HAND, MORE
THAN MOST OF US CAN IMAGINE.
OF THE HARSH REALITIES OF LIFE
BUT RATHER THAN LETTING THE
THAN MOST OF US CAN IMAGINE.
DARKNESS OVERWHELM HIM, HE HAS
BUT RATHER THAN LETTING THE
CHOSEN TO BELIEVE IN THE GOOD--
DARKNESS OVERWHELM HIM, HE HAS
IN HIMSELF AND IN OTHERS.
CHOSEN TO BELIEVE IN THE GOOD--
PETER'S LIFE IS EVIDENCE THAT HE
IN HIMSELF AND IN OTHERS.
HAS BEEN RIGHT ALL ALONG: ONE
PETER'S LIFE IS EVIDENCE THAT HE
PERSON MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
HAS BEEN RIGHT ALL ALONG: ONE
>> Ifill: ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS
PERSON MAKES A DIFFERENCE.
RELEASED A PROPAGANDA VIDEO
>> Ifill: ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS
YESTERDAY SHOWING THE
RELEASED A PROPAGANDA VIDEO
DECAPITATED HEAD OF PETER
YESTERDAY SHOWING THE
KASSIG.
DECAPITATED HEAD OF PETER
>> Ifill: LATE PRER,SIDENT OBAMA
KASSIG.
CONFIRMED AND CONDEMNED KASSIG'S
>> Ifill: LATE PRER,SIDENT OBAMA
KILLING IN A STATEMENT, CALLING
CONFIRMED AND CONDEMNED KASSIG'S
IT AN "ACT OF PURE EVIL BY A
KILLING IN A STATEMENT, CALLING
TERRORIST GROUP THAT THE WORLD
IT AN "ACT OF PURE EVIL BY A
RIGHTLY ASSOCIATES WITH
TERRORIST GROUP THAT THE WORLD
INHUMANITY."
RIGHTLY ASSOCIATES WITH
BUT SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
INHUMANITY."
KERRY INSISTED TODAY, THE GROUP,
BUT SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
ALSO KNOWN AS ISIL, HAS
KERRY INSISTED TODAY, THE GROUP,
MISCALCULATED.
ALSO KNOWN AS ISIL, HAS
>> ISIL'S LEADERS ASSUMED THAT
MISCALCULATED.
THE WORLD WOULD BE TOO
>> ISIL'S LEADERS ASSUMED THAT
INTIMIDATED TO OPPOSE THEM.
THE WORLD WOULD BE TOO
WELL, LET US BE CLEAR-- WE ARE
INTIMIDATED TO OPPOSE THEM.
NOT INTIMIDATED.
WELL, LET US BE CLEAR-- WE ARE
>> Ifill: PETER KASSIG SERVED IN
NOT INTIMIDATED.
IRAQ AS AN ARMY RANGER IN 2007.
>> Ifill: PETER KASSIG SERVED IN
AFTER A MEDICAL DISCHARGE, HE
IRAQ AS AN ARMY RANGER IN 2007.
FOUNDED AN AID GROUP IN SYRIA IN
AFTER A MEDICAL DISCHARGE, HE
2012.
FOUNDED AN AID GROUP IN SYRIA IN
HE WAS TAKEN CAPTIVE IN OCTOBER
2012.
OF LAST YEAR, AND CONVERTED TO
HE WAS TAKEN CAPTIVE IN OCTOBER
ISLAM, AS SEVERAL OTHER WESTERN
OF LAST YEAR, AND CONVERTED TO
CAPTIVES HAVE DONE, TAKING THE
ISLAM, AS SEVERAL OTHER WESTERN
NAME "ABDUL-RAHMAN".
CAPTIVES HAVE DONE, TAKING THE
LAST MONTH, HIS PARENTS
NAME "ABDUL-RAHMAN".
ACKNOWLEDGED HIS CONVERSION, AND
LAST MONTH, HIS PARENTS
APPEALED FOR HIS RELEASE.
ACKNOWLEDGED HIS CONVERSION, AND
>> WE IMPLORE THOSE WHO ARE
APPEALED FOR HIS RELEASE.
HOLDING YOU TO SHOW MERCY AND
>> WE IMPLORE THOSE WHO ARE
USE THEIR POWER TO LET YOU GO.
HOLDING YOU TO SHOW MERCY AND
>> Ifill: BUT IT WAS ALL FOR
USE THEIR POWER TO LET YOU GO.
NAUGHT.
>> Ifill: BUT IT WAS ALL FOR
IN YESTERDAY'S VIDEO, A BLACK-
NAUGHT.
HOODED FIGURE WITH A BRITISH
IN YESTERDAY'S VIDEO, A BLACK-
ACCENT, APPARENTLY THE SAME MAN
HOODED FIGURE WITH A BRITISH
SEEN IN PREVIOUS BEHEADINGS,
ACCENT, APPARENTLY THE SAME MAN
IDENTIFIED HIS NEW VICTIM AS
SEEN IN PREVIOUS BEHEADINGS,
"PETER EDWARD KASSIG, A U.S.
IDENTIFIED HIS NEW VICTIM AS
CITIZEN WHO FOUGHT AGAINST THE
"PETER EDWARD KASSIG, A U.S.
MUSLIMS IN IRAQ."
CITIZEN WHO FOUGHT AGAINST THE
UNLIKE PAST VIDEOS, THIS ONE DID
MUSLIMS IN IRAQ."
NOT SHOW KASSIG'S ACTUAL
UNLIKE PAST VIDEOS, THIS ONE DID
KILLING.
NOT SHOW KASSIG'S ACTUAL
BUT IT DID SHOW MORE THAN A
KILLING.
DOZEN CAPTURED SYRIAN SOLDIERS
BUT IT DID SHOW MORE THAN A
BEING BEHEADED BY MILITANTS,
DOZEN CAPTURED SYRIAN SOLDIERS
POSSIBLY INCLUDING THIS MAN,
BEING BEHEADED BY MILITANTS,
FROM AN EARLIER VIDEO.
POSSIBLY INCLUDING THIS MAN,
>> ALL YOU WHO BELIEVE, ANSWER
FROM AN EARLIER VIDEO.
THE CALL OF ALLAH AND HIS
>> ALL YOU WHO BELIEVE, ANSWER
MESSENGER, WHEN HE CALLS YOU TO
THE CALL OF ALLAH AND HIS
WHAT GIVES YOU LIFE.
MESSENGER, WHEN HE CALLS YOU TO
WHAT GIVES YOU LIFE IS JIHAD.
WHAT GIVES YOU LIFE.
>> Ifill: THE FATHER OF NASSER
WHAT GIVES YOU LIFE IS JIHAD.
MUTHANA, A BRITISH MEDICAL
>> Ifill: THE FATHER OF NASSER
STUDENT, SAID HIS SON RESEMBLES
MUTHANA, A BRITISH MEDICAL
ONE OF THE MILITANTS IN THE
STUDENT, SAID HIS SON RESEMBLES
LATEST VIDEO.
ONE OF THE MILITANTS IN THE
AND IN PARIS, OFFICIALS SAID A
LATEST VIDEO.
22-YEAR-OLD FRENCHMAN WAS LIKELY
AND IN PARIS, OFFICIALS SAID A
AMONG THE EXECUTIONERS AS WELL.
22-YEAR-OLD FRENCHMAN WAS LIKELY
ALL TOLD, ISLAMIC STATE FORCES
AMONG THE EXECUTIONERS AS WELL.
HAVE KILLED FIVE WESTERNERS
ALL TOLD, ISLAMIC STATE FORCES
SINCE AUGUST.
HAVE KILLED FIVE WESTERNERS
SYRIAN CIVILIANS HAVE PAID A FAR
SINCE AUGUST.
MORE FEARSOME TOLL.
SYRIAN CIVILIANS HAVE PAID A FAR
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
MORE FEARSOME TOLL.
RIGHTS REPORTED TODAY MORE THAN
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
1,400 HAVE BEEN BEHEADED, STONED
RIGHTS REPORTED TODAY MORE THAN
TO DEATH OR HAD THEIR THROATS
1,400 HAVE BEEN BEHEADED, STONED
CUT SINCE JUNE.
TO DEATH OR HAD THEIR THROATS
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS STILL
CUT SINCE JUNE.
HOLD A BRITISH PHOTOJOURNALIST,
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS STILL
JOHN CANTLIE, AND AN AMERICAN
HOLD A BRITISH PHOTOJOURNALIST,
WOMAN.
JOHN CANTLIE, AND AN AMERICAN
U.S. OFFICIALS HAVE ASKED THAT
WOMAN.
SHE NOT BE PUBLICLY IDENTIFIED.
U.S. OFFICIALS HAVE ASKED THAT
>> Woodruff: MISSOURI GOVERNOR
SHE NOT BE PUBLICLY IDENTIFIED.
JAY NIXON DECLARED AN EMERGENCY
>> Woodruff: MISSOURI GOVERNOR
AND ACTIVATED THE NATIONAL GUARD
JAY NIXON DECLARED AN EMERGENCY
TODAY.
AND ACTIVATED THE NATIONAL GUARD
HE ACTED BEFORE A GRAND JURY
TODAY.
DECIDES WHETHER TO INDICT A
HE ACTED BEFORE A GRAND JURY
WHITE POLICE OFFICER IN
DECIDES WHETHER TO INDICT A
FERGUSON, IN THE KILLING OF
WHITE POLICE OFFICER IN
MICHAEL BROWN.
FERGUSON, IN THE KILLING OF
THE AUGUST SHOOTING SPARKED
MICHAEL BROWN.
VIOLENT PROTESTS.
THE AUGUST SHOOTING SPARKED
THE ST. LOUIS MAYOR SAID THE
VIOLENT PROTESTS.
GUARD WILL BACK UP POLICE, BUT
THE ST. LOUIS MAYOR SAID THE
WILL NOT ENGAGE DIRECTLY WITH
GUARD WILL BACK UP POLICE, BUT
PROTESTERS.
WILL NOT ENGAGE DIRECTLY WITH
>> Ifill: FRESH OFF A MAJOR
PROTESTERS.
EMISSIONS-CUTTING DEAL WITH
>> Ifill: FRESH OFF A MAJOR
CHINA, THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
EMISSIONS-CUTTING DEAL WITH
IS TURNING TO FIGHTING CLIMATE
CHINA, THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
CHANGE AT THE LOCAL LEVEL.
IS TURNING TO FIGHTING CLIMATE
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN MET TODAY
CHANGE AT THE LOCAL LEVEL.
WITH GOVERNORS, MAYORS AND
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN MET TODAY
TRIBAL LEADERS ABOUT COPING WITH
WITH GOVERNORS, MAYORS AND
SEVERE WEATHER.
TRIBAL LEADERS ABOUT COPING WITH
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS ALSO LAID
SEVERE WEATHER.
OUT MEASURES TO HELP LOCAL
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS ALSO LAID
LEADERS GET READY FOR RISING SEA
OUT MEASURES TO HELP LOCAL
LEVELS, DROUGHT AND OTHER
LEADERS GET READY FOR RISING SEA
EVENTS.
LEVELS, DROUGHT AND OTHER
>> Woodruff: A DOCTOR WHO
EVENTS.
CONTRACTED EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE
>> Woodruff: A DOCTOR WHO
DIED TODAY AT A HOSPITAL IN
CONTRACTED EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE
OMAHA, NEBRASKA.
DIED TODAY AT A HOSPITAL IN
MARTIN SALIA WAS FLOWN TO THE
OMAHA, NEBRASKA.
U.S. FROM WEST AFRICA ON
MARTIN SALIA WAS FLOWN TO THE
SATURDAY.
U.S. FROM WEST AFRICA ON
THE 44-YEAR-OLD SURGEON
SATURDAY.
INITIALLY TESTED NEGATIVE FOR
THE 44-YEAR-OLD SURGEON
EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE.
INITIALLY TESTED NEGATIVE FOR
BY THE TIME HE TESTED POSITIVE
EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE.
AND WAS SENT TO OMAHA, THE
BY THE TIME HE TESTED POSITIVE
DISEASE WAS FAR ADVANCED.
AND WAS SENT TO OMAHA, THE
HE HAD NO KIDNEY FUNCTION.
DISEASE WAS FAR ADVANCED.
HE WAS WORKING EXTREMELY HARD TO
HE HAD NO KIDNEY FUNCTION.
BREATHE AND WAS UNRESPONSIVE.
HE WAS WORKING EXTREMELY HARD TO
WE GAVE IT EVERYTHING WE COULD.
BREATHE AND WAS UNRESPONSIVE.
ALL MODERN MEDICAL THERAPIES
WE GAVE IT EVERYTHING WE COULD.
WERE PROVIDED AND WE WISH THERE
ALL MODERN MEDICAL THERAPIES
COULD HAVE BEEN A DIFFERENT
WERE PROVIDED AND WE WISH THERE
OUTCOME BUT I'M PROUD OF THE
COULD HAVE BEEN A DIFFERENT
TEAM FOR TRYING.
OUTCOME BUT I'M PROUD OF THE
>> Woodruff: ALSO TODAY, U.S.
TEAM FOR TRYING.
AIRPORTS BEGAN SCREENING
>> Woodruff: ALSO TODAY, U.S.
TRAVELERS ARRIVING FROM MALI FOR
AIRPORTS BEGAN SCREENING
SYMPTOMS OF EBOLA.
TRAVELERS ARRIVING FROM MALI FOR
SEVERAL CASES HAVE APPEARED
SYMPTOMS OF EBOLA.
THERE IN RECENT DAYS.
SEVERAL CASES HAVE APPEARED
>> Ifill: EFFORTS TO STOP AN
THERE IN RECENT DAYS.
OUTBREAK OF BIRD FLU RAMPED UP
>> Ifill: EFFORTS TO STOP AN
IN THE NETHERLANDS AND BRITAIN
OUTBREAK OF BIRD FLU RAMPED UP
TODAY.
IN THE NETHERLANDS AND BRITAIN
THE DUTCH GOVERNMENT ORDERED THE
TODAY.
KILLING OF 150,000 CHICKENS ON A
THE DUTCH GOVERNMENT ORDERED THE
FARM WHERE THE DISEASE WAS
KILLING OF 150,000 CHICKENS ON A
FOUND.
FARM WHERE THE DISEASE WAS
6,000 DUCKS AT BRE AEDING FARM
FOUND.
IN NORTHERN ENGLAND WERE TO BE
6,000 DUCKS AT BRE AEDING FARM
DESTROYED, AND A RESTRICTION
IN NORTHERN ENGLAND WERE TO BE
ZONE IMPOSED.
DESTROYED, AND A RESTRICTION
BUT OFFICIALS SAID THERE'S
ZONE IMPOSED.
LITTLE RISK TO PUBLIC HEALTH.
BUT OFFICIALS SAID THERE'S
SEPARATELY, A WOMAN IN EGYPT
LITTLE RISK TO PUBLIC HEALTH.
DIED OF A MORE DANGEROUS STRAIN
SEPARATELY, A WOMAN IN EGYPT
OF BIRD FLU.
DIED OF A MORE DANGEROUS STRAIN
IT'S THE SECOND FATALITY THERE
OF BIRD FLU.
THIS YEAR.
IT'S THE SECOND FATALITY THERE
>> Woodruff: THE FIRST
THIS YEAR.
SPACECRAFT TO LAND ON A COMET
>> Woodruff: THE FIRST
HAS GONE SILENT, AFTER RUNNING
SPACECRAFT TO LAND ON A COMET
OUT OF POWER.
HAS GONE SILENT, AFTER RUNNING
BUT EUROPEAN SCIENTISTS SAID
OUT OF POWER.
TODAY THEY'RE HOLDING OUT HOPE
BUT EUROPEAN SCIENTISTS SAID
THE SMALL LANDER WILL EVENTUALLY
TODAY THEY'RE HOLDING OUT HOPE
WAKE UP.
THE SMALL LANDER WILL EVENTUALLY
THE LANDER ENDED UP IN THE
WAKE UP.
SHADOW OF A CLIFF WHERE ITS
THE LANDER ENDED UP IN THE
SOLAR PANELS CAN'T CHARGE THE
SHADOW OF A CLIFF WHERE ITS
BATTERY.
SOLAR PANELS CAN'T CHARGE THE
MISSION SCIENTISTS SAID TODAY
BATTERY.
THAT AS THE COMET RACES TOWARD
MISSION SCIENTISTS SAID TODAY
THE SUN, THE BATTERY MAY YET
THAT AS THE COMET RACES TOWARD
CHARGE AND LET THE SPACECRAFT
THE SUN, THE BATTERY MAY YET
RESUME ITS WORK.
CHARGE AND LET THE SPACECRAFT
>> Ifill: THE WORLD'S THIRD
RESUME ITS WORK.
LARGEST ECONOMY, JAPAN, HAS
>> Ifill: THE WORLD'S THIRD
UNEXPECTEDLY FALLEN INTO A NEW
LARGEST ECONOMY, JAPAN, HAS
RECESSION.
UNEXPECTEDLY FALLEN INTO A NEW
OFFICIALS IN TOKYO ANNOUNCED
RECESSION.
TODAY THAT OVERALL ECONOMIC
OFFICIALS IN TOKYO ANNOUNCED
OUTPUT SHRANK IN THE THIRD
TODAY THAT OVERALL ECONOMIC
QUARTER AT AN ANNUAL RATE OF
OUTPUT SHRANK IN THE THIRD
1.6%.
QUARTER AT AN ANNUAL RATE OF
BY COMPARISON, THE U.S. ECONOMY
1.6%.
GREW AT A 3.5% PACE.
BY COMPARISON, THE U.S. ECONOMY
>> Woodruff: AND ON WALL STREET,
GREW AT A 3.5% PACE.
STOCKS STRUGGLE TO MAKE MUCH
>> Woodruff: AND ON WALL STREET,
HEADWAY.
STOCKS STRUGGLE TO MAKE MUCH
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
HEADWAY.
GAINED 13 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
17,647; THE NASDAQ FELL 17
GAINED 13 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,671; AND
17,647; THE NASDAQ FELL 17
THE S&P 500 GAINED JUST A POINT,
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,671; AND
TO FINISH AT 2,041.
THE S&P 500 GAINED JUST A POINT,
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
TO FINISH AT 2,041.
NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
A NEW POLITICAL FIRESTORM AROUND
NEWSHOUR.
THE FEDERAL HEATH CARE LAW.
A NEW POLITICAL FIRESTORM AROUND
HO AMEWRICAN SOLDIERS ARE
THE FEDERAL HEATH CARE LAW.
HAUNTED BY THE BATTLE FIELD BURN
HO AMEWRICAN SOLDIERS ARE
PITS.
HAUNTED BY THE BATTLE FIELD BURN
SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN ON THE LIVES
PITS.
OF THIRTEEN SOLDIERS WHO FOUGHT
SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN ON THE LIVES
IN THIRTEEN DIFFERENT WARS.
OF THIRTEEN SOLDIERS WHO FOUGHT
INVESTIGATING THE N.F.L.'S USE
IN THIRTEEN DIFFERENT WARS.
OF PAINKILLERS TO KEEP PLAYERS
INVESTIGATING THE N.F.L.'S USE
IN THE GAME.
OF PAINKILLERS TO KEEP PLAYERS
AND, SCIENTISTS TRACK THE
IN THE GAME.
DECLINE OF ALASKA'S GLACIERS.
>> Woodruff: THIS WEEKEND MARKED
THE START OF A NEW ROUND OF
ENROLLMENT FOR INSURANCE
COVERAGE ON THE HEALTH
EXCHANGES.
BUT EVEN AS THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HERALDED THE MUCH
SMOOTHER OPENING OF THE
healthcare.gov WEBSITE, THERE
WAS SERIOUS POLITICAL BLOWBACK
ABOUT THE LAW.
LAST WEEK, A VIDEO FROM 2013
CAME TO LIGHT FEATURING M.I.T.
ECONOMIST JONATHAN GRUBER, A
FORMER ADVISER TO THE
ADMINISTRATION, AND PAID
CONSULTANT WHO RECEIVED $400,000
FOR HIS WORK DURING THE CREATION
AND PASSAGE OF THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
HE WAS AN ARCHITECT OF THE
MASSACHUSETTS LAW THAT PRECEDED
THE FEDERAL LAW.
GRUBER SPOKE AT A CONFERENCE IN
PENNSYLVANIA IN OCTOBER 2013 AND
HERE'S A CLIP WHERE HE TALKS
ABOUT HOW CONGRESS WOULD PAY FOR
THE LAW WHEN IT COMES TO
MANDATES AND TAXES.
AND HOW VOTERS MIGHT SEE THAT.
>> THIS BILL WAS WRITTEN IN A
WAY TO MAKE SURE THEY DID NOT
HAVE THE MANDATED TAXES.
IN TERMS OF SUBSIDIES, A LAW
WHICH SAID HEALTHY PEOPLE WOULD
PAY IN AND SICK PEOPLE GET
MONEY, IT WOULD HAVE NOT PASSED.
JUST LIKE PEOPLE'S LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY IS A HUGE POLITICAL
ADVANTAGE AND BASICALLY CALL
STUPIDITY OF THE AMERICAN VOTER
OR WHATEVER BUT BASICALLY THAT
WAS REALLY CRITICAL TO GET IT
PASSED.
>> Woodruff: YESTERDAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS ASKED BY A
REPORTER ABOUT GRUBER'S COMMENTS
AND THE IDEA THAT THE TRUE
INTENTIONS OF THE LAW WERE NOT
TRANSPARENT TO VOTERS. HERE'S
PART OF WHAT HE SAID IN RESPONSE
WHILE IN BRISBANE, AUSTRALIA.
>> THE FACT THAT SOME ADVISOR
WHO NEVER WORKED ON OUR STAFF
EXPRESSED AN OPINION THAT I
COMPLETELY DISAGREE WITH IN
TERMS OF THE VOTERS IS NO
REFLECTION ON THE ACTUAL PROCESS
THAT WAS RUN.
WE HAD A YEAR-LONG DEBATE.
GO BACK AND LOOK AT YOUR
STORIES.
THE ONE THING WE CAN'T SAY IS WE
DID NOT HAVE A LENGTHY DEBATE
ABOUT HEALTHCARE IN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA OR THAT IT WAS
NOT ADEQUATELY COVERED.
>> Woodruff: LET'S DIVE A BIT
DEEPER INTO JONATHAN GRUBER'S
>> I THINK GRUBER'S COMMENTS
SHOW WHAT IS CONSISTENT IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. IS THIS
ARROGANCE OF CENTRALIZED
GOVERNMENT.
THIS ADMINISTRATION BELIEVES
THEY'RE SMARTER THAN EVERYONE
ELSE AND THEY JUST NEED TO
CREATE THE POLICY AND IMPOSE THE
POLICY AND STATES EXIST ONLY TO
CARRY OUT THEIR WISHES FROM THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT.
I THINK THAT'S BACKWARDS.
THE BEST THING TO DO IS RETURN
H
>> Woodruff: LET'S DIVE A BIT
EALTHCARE DECISIONS BACK TO
STATES, BACK TO LOCAL
AUTHORITIES.
>> Woodruff: LET'S DIVE A BIT
DEEPER INTO JONATHAN GRUBER'S
HISTORY HERE, AS WELL AS HOW THE
OPENING WEEKEND OF YEAR TWO ON
INSURANCE ENROLLMENT WENT.
JULIE ROVNER OF KAISER HEALTH
NEWS.
AND, LOUISE RADNOFSKY OF "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL" JOIN ME.
BEFORE WE GET TO MR. GRUBER, LET
ME ASK YOU ABOUT SIGNUP THIS
WEEKEND.
LOUISE, HOW DID IT GO?
SMOOTHER THAN LAST YEAR?
>> SMOOTHER THAN LAST YEAR.
RELATIVELY FEW BUMPS, SOME
RETURNING TO THE SITE, SOME OF
WHICH WERE IRONED OUT OVER THE
WEEKEND.
POTENTIAL FOR NEW BUMPS IN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS.
TRAFFIC WAS HIGHER TODAY THAN
OVER THE WEEKEND AND COULD
PRESENT CHALLENGES BUT BIGGER
CHALLENGES TO COME A WEEK FROM
NOW.
>> Woodruff: WHAT KIND OF
BUMPS?
>> SOME FORGOT PASSWORDS, OR PUT
IN OR CHANGED PASSWORDS AND
COULDN'T GET IN.
IT'S IMPORTANT FOR PEOPLE WHO
ARE COVERED THROUGH THE
EXCHANGES TO GO THROUGH THE
PROCESS AGAIN.
IF THEIR INCOME HAS CHANGED,
THEY NEED TO PLUG THAT IN, IN
MANY CASES, THE PRICES OF PLANS
HAVE CHANGED.
SO BEING REENROLLED IN THEIR
CURRENT PLAN WOULD BE BAD FOR
PEOPLE WHO CURRENTLY HAVE
COVERAGE.
THEY NEED TO LOOK FOR WHAT'S OUT
THERE.
>> Woodruff: YOU SAY THINGS
WILL GET MORE COMPLICATED.
WHAT ARE YOU REFERRING TO?
>> ONE OF THE PROBLEMS IS PEOPLE
GOING BACK TO THE SITE AND SHOP.
THERE ARE THINGS AT THE BACK-END
THAT MATTER A LOT.
>> Woodruff: THE BACK-END?
THE UNDERLYING
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WHAT PEOPLE SEE AS A SMOOTHER
APPLICATION PROCESS.
ONE PIECE THAT'S MISSING IS THE
ABILITY OFF THE SITE TO INFORM
THE INSURER IS ENROLLING IN
ANOTHER PLAN WHICH MAY LEAD THEM
TO BE ENROLLED IN TWO PLANS AT
THE END OF THE YEAR.
>> Woodruff: THEY'RE WORKING
TO MAKE SURE THAT COUNTRY
HAPPEN?
>> THEY SHOULD CONTACT THE
INSURANCE COMPANY THEY'RE
LEAVING TO INFORM OF THAT IN
CASE THE REST OF THE SYSTEM
DOESN'T MAKE THAT INFORMATION
CHANGE.
>> Woodruff: CONTACT THEM
DIRECTLY.
IT GOES UP FEBRUARY 15.
>> IF YOU WANT A PLAN FOR
JANUARY 1, YOU HAVE TO SIGN UP
BY DECEMBER 15.
THIS IS A CONDENSED PERIOD OF
SIGNUP COMPARED TO LAST YEAR
WHERE THERE WERE SIX MONTHS.
ANYBODY WHO WANTS COVERAGE
SHOULD FINISH BY DECEMBER 15.
>> Woodruff: JONATHAN GRUBER,
WE HEARD THE COMMENTS ABOUT HIM
DOING CONTRACT WORK WITH THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
HE FIRST WORKED TO DEVELOP THE
MASSACHUSETTS HEALTHCARE LAW
UNDER THEN GOVERNOR MITT ROMNEY.
JULIE, YOU COVERED THE OBAMA
HEALTHCARE DEBATE INTERNALLY
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING.
WHAT WAS HIS ROLE HERE AND HOW
DID IT PLAY OFF WHAT HE DID IN
MASSACHUSETTS, HE OBVIOUSLY WAS
INTEGRAL TO WHAT HAPPENED IN
MASSACHUSETTS BUT HIS MAIN ROLE
WITH THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IS
HE DEVELOPED A MICROSTIMULATION
MODEL AND BASICALLY YOU CAN PLUG
THINGS IN, POSSIBLE POLICY
CHANGES AND SEE SORT OF HOW THEY
MIGHT PLAY OUT BOTH IN TERMS OF
THE POLICY AND IN TERMS OF HOW
MUCH THEY COST AND THAT'S WHAT
THE ADMINISTRATION CONTRACTED
WITH HIM FOR.
HE CONTRACTED OUT WITH SEVERAL
STATES TO LOOK AT THE SAME
THING.
HE'S KNOWN FOR HIS
MICROSTIMULATION MODEL.
THERE'S NOT THE IMPRESSION HE
WAS IN THE ROOM WHEN ALL THE KEY
DECISIONS WERE MADE BUT HE
CERTAINLY WAS INVOLVED.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S THE
QUESTION BECAUSE SOME HAVE
CALLED HIM AN ARCHITECT OF THE
HEALTHCARE LAW.
HOW CERALNT WAS HE TO ALL THIS?
>> HE'S CERTAINLY ONE OF MANY,
MANY CENTRAL FIGURES WHICH IS
NOT A VERY HELPFUL BIT OF
INFORMATION TO PEOPLE AT THIS
STAGE.
BUT THERE WERE AGENCIES WORKING
ON THIS FROM THE WHITE HOUSE AND
THERE WERE OFFICIALS IN MANY
DIFFERENT CONGRESSIONAL OFFICES,
AND OUTSIDE AS WELL INCLUDING
SOME IN ACADEMIA.
SO THERE'S NO SHORTAGE OF PEOPLE
INVOLVED.
INVOLVEMENT OFTEN RISES WHEN
THEY'RE IN THE SPOTLIGHT.
>> Woodruff: JULIE, WHAT ABOUT
THE SUBSTANCE OF WHAT HE WAS
SAYING THAT THE ADMINISTRATION
WAS CONCEALING FROM THE PUBLIC
THAT THIS WAS A TAX AS THE
SUPREME COURT LATER FOUND IT TO
BE?
>> THERE WERE A LOT OF
INTERPRETATIONS OF.
THIS ONE OF THE THINGS I THINK
HE MAY HAVE BEEN REFERRING TO IS
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO CALL ATE TAX
WHILE IT WAS BEING DEBATED
BECAUSE THERE WERE SO MANY
BLUE-DOG, MODERATE DEMOCRATS WHO
DIDN'T WANT TO HAVE THE TAX
LABEL HUNG AROUND THEM IF THEY
WERE GOING TO VOTE FOR THIS.
REMEMBER THE REPUBLICANS HAD
TAKEN A PASS SO THEY NEEDED ALL
THE DEMOCRATS FROM THE SENATE
AND ALMOST ALL IN THE HOUSE AND
THEY HAD THE BLUE DOGS WHO WERE
VERY CONCERNED ABOUT VOTING FOR
THIS.
SO SOME OF THIS I THINK WAS JUST
SEMANTICS.
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO CALL IT A
TAX.
INTERESTINGABLY, IN GRUBER'S OWN
BOOK, HE TALKS ABOUT HOW, WITH
INSURANCE, THE SICK HAVE TO PAY
FOR THE HEALTHY AND YOUNG PAY
FOR THE OLD AND THAT'S THE IDEA
THAT EVERYBODY PAYS AND A FEW
GET.
SO IT WAS ODD TO HEAR HIM SAY
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> Woodruff: WHETHER HE SAID
IT BECAUSE OF WHAT WAS GOING ON,
HOW MUCH WAS THAT VIEWED SHARED
INSIDE THE ADMINISTRATION BASED
ON YOUR REPORTING ON THIS,
LOUISE?
>> ONE OF THE KEY ISSUES HE'S
SAYING IS IT PLAYS INTO FEARS OF
CONSERVATIVE PUNDITS OF THE LAW
LIKE SENATOR LANGFORD THAT THIS
WAS IN SOME WAY A CON OR LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY, RUN DOWN PEOPLE'S
THROATS WITHOUT THEIR
INVOLVEMENT.
GRUBER'S COMMENTS IN THE PAST
CAUSED CONSTERNATION WAS HE'S
TALKING ABOUT A SUBSTANTIVE
ISSUE RATHER THAN A FRAMING
ISSUE.
>> Woodruff: JULIE, WHAT'S
YOUR SENSE OF HOW WIDELY SHARED
THE VIEW WAS HE EXPRESSED THAT
THE VOTERS, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE
NOT GOING TO UNDERSTAND THIS
AND, THEREFORE, WE DON'T NEED TO
BE COMPLETELY TRANSPARENT?
>> NOBODY IN POLITICS WOULD SAY
THAT, WHICH SHOWS WHY HE'S AN
ECONOMIST IN ACADEMIA AND NOT A
POLITICIAN, AND I THINK THAT'S
WHY YOU SEE THE PRESIDENT AND
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY DISTANCE THEMSELVES
FROM HIM AND THE COMMENTS.
IT WAS A VERY IMPOLL TICK IN THE
LITERAL SENSE OF THE WORD TO
SAY.
BUT I THINK THE PROBLEM WAS
THERE WAS A PILE OF DRY KINDLING
AMONG THE REPUBLICANS TO FIND
OUT WHAT TO DO ABOUT THIS LAW
THEY AND THEY PERCEIVE THE
PUBLIC DON'T LIKE.
>> Woodruff: HOW MANY
ADDITIONAL DAMAGE?
WE ALREADY SEE PUBLIC OPINION
CONTINUING TO DROP IN SUPPORT OF
THE HEALTHCARE LAW.
HOW MUCH DOES THIS HURT WHAT THE
ADMINISTRATION IS TRYING TO DO?
>> WELL, THE TIMING IS VERY
PARTICULAR TO THE OPEN
ENROLLMENT.
IT'S BEEN BUILDING ALL WEEK BUT
SEEMED TO EXPLODE INTO MORE
MAINSTREAM ATTENTION AT THE TIME
IT OPENED AND THAT MAY OR MAY
NOT BE AN ACCIDENT WHERE THE
SUPREME COURT IS WRESTLING WITH
THE SUPREME COURT CASE WHICH
LAUNCHED IT WASSELF BEFORE THE
ENROLLMENT.
THERE ARE A LOTTO JUGGLE.
>> Woodruff: A LOT TO KEEP
ABEYE ON BESIDE THE OPENING THIS
WEEKEND.
LOUISE RADNOFSKY, JULIE ROVNER,
WE THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: BRAIN INJURY AND POST-
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER ARE
TWO WELL KNOWN SIGNATURE WOUNDS
OF THE WARS IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
BUT, THERE IS ANOTHER INJURY,
LUNG DISEASE, THAT AFFLICTS TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF VETERANS.
MANY BLAME A SINGLE DEFENSE
CONTRACTOR, AND HAVE FILED A
CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT A CASE THAT
HAS NOW MADE ITS WAY TO THE
SUPREME COURT.
NEWSHOUR PRODUCER DAN SAGALYN
HAS BEEN LOOKING INTO THIS, AND
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS HIS REPORT.
>> HEY, THERE IS A BURN PIT DOWN
HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS SHAKY VIDEO
OF SMOKE FROM BURNING GARBAGE
WAS SHOT BY AN AMERICAN SOLDIER
IN IRAQ IN 2008.
THROUGHO MOSUTT OF THE WARS IN
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN, THE
MILITARY USED SO-CALLED BURN
PITS TO DISPOSE OF VIRTUALLY ALL
WASTE.
ALL KINDS OF THINGS WENT UP IN
SMOKE, FROM BATTERIES, PAINT,
SOLVENTS AND TIRES, TO
NEWSPAPERS, PLASTIC WATER
BOTTLES, STYROFOAM, ELECTRONIC
EQUIPMENT, AND SHIPPING
MATERIALS SUCH AS PLASTIC WRAP.
EVEN WHOLE VEHICLES WERE BURNED.
AT LARGE BASES 30 TO 40 OF TONS
GARBAGE WERE BURNED ERY DVEAY.
AT THE GIGANTIC LOGISTICAL HUBS,
THREE TO FIVE TIMES THAT AMOUNT
WAS BURNED.
SOMETIMES JET FUEL WAS EVEN USED
TO IGNITE THE TRASH.
ACCORDING TO THE VETERANS WE
SPOKE TO, THE SMOKE FROM THE
BURN PITS PERMEATED THE LIVING
QUARTERS AND WORK SPACES ON
BASE.
>> THERE WAS REALLY NO PLACE TO
ESCAPE.
THE SMOKE WOULD BLOW ACROSS YOU,
YOU'D TURN YOUR BACK TO IT AND
HOPE THAT THE WIND WOULD CHANGE.
>> YOU HAVE TO BREATH OR YOU
DIE. AND SOMETIMES EVEN THE SOOT
WOULD FLY OUT OF THE BURN PITS
AND GET ON YOUR UNIFORM OR GET
ON YOUR VEHICLE.
>> AT NIGHT WHEN THE WINDS
DROPPED THAT'S WHEN YOU DID NOT
WANT TO THE BURN PITS TO BE
OPERATING BECAUSE IT WOULD
BLANKET THE BASE.
>> Sreenivasan: THESE THREE
OFFICERS, ARMY SERGEANT FIRST
CLASS STEVEN GARDNER, ARMY
LIEUTENANT COLONEL RICK LAMBERTH
AND MARINE CORPS LIEUTENANT
COLONEL BRIAN BOWER, WERE
MEDICALLY RETIRED FROM THE
MILITARY.
THEY SAY THE BURN PIT SMOKE WAS
TOXIC AND MADE THEM SICK.
>> I USED TO RUN FIVE MINUTE
MILES, NOW I CAN'T WALK DOWN THE
BLOCK WITHOUT BREATHING REAL
HEAVY.
I CAN'T CARRY OBJECTS WITHOUT
GETTING OUT OF BREATH, I HAVE A
TIGHTNESS CONSTANTLY IN MY
CHEST.
>> I NO LONGER CAN RUN.
I DON'T HAVE THE STAMINA THAT I
HAD AT ONE TIME.
I COULD GO RUN FIVE OR SIX MILES
AT A TIME, 10K AT A TIME.
>> A LOT OF TIMES EVEN DURING
THE DAY I COUGH AND PEOPLE LOOK
AT ME LIKE I'M A SMOKER.
>> I BELIEVE THAT I HAVE LUNG
CANCER AS A RESULT OF EXPOSURE
TO THE BURN PITS.
I'M NOT A SMOKER.
I WAS DIAGNOSED WITHIN A YEAR
AFTER LEAVING ACTIVE DUTY, AND
THE DIAGNOSIS CAME FROM THE
VETERAN'S ADMINISTRATION.
IT WAS DIAGNOSED AS EXPOSURE TO
BURN PITS AND I HAD PART OF MY
LUNG REMOVED.RE
PART OF A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT
WHICH HAS 250 NAMED PLAINTIFFS.
BUT THEY REPRESENT A GROUP OF
POTENTIALLY UP TO 100,000
VETERANS AND CIVILIAN
CONTRACTORS WHO COULD JOIN SUIT.
THEY'RE SUING KELLOG, BROWN AND
ROOT, OR K.B.R., THE COMPANY
THAT USED TO BE A SUBSIDIARY OF
HALLIBURTON AND WAS CONTRACTED
TO PROVIDE LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO
THE MILITARY IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
IT WAS K.B.R.'S JOB TO TRUCK IN
SUPPLIES, FEED TROOPS, AND GET
RID OF THE GARBAGE.
>> WE'VE OUTLAWED BURNING OF
WASTE IN THIS COUNTRY FOR
DECADES.
YOU CANNOT GO IN YOUR BACKYARD
AND BURN ALL YOUR TRASH IN A
BUCKET.
AND THE REASON WHY IS THAT IT'S
KNOWN TO BE HARMFUL TO HUMAN
HEALTH.
>> Sreenivasan: SUSAN BURKE IS
THE LEAD ATTORNEY FOR THE CLASS
ACTION LAWSUIT.
SHE SAYS K.B.R. WAS NEGLIGENT
AND MADE THE SERVICE MEMBERS
SICK.
>> ONE OF T THIHENGS THAT THEY
PROMISED TO DO WAS TO TAKE CARE
OF THE WASTE.
TO DISPOSE OF THE WASTE IN A
MANNER THAT WAS NOT HARMFUL TO
THE TROOPS.
THEY DIDN'T DO THAT.
SO, THE COMPLAINT ALLEGES THAT
THAT OPEN AIR BURNING WHICH
VIOLATED THE TERMS OF THE
CONTRACT, CAUSED THESE INJURIES.
>> THAT'S COMPLETELY FALSE.
WE EXACTLY LIVED UP TO OUR
CONTRACTUAL PROMISE.
>> Sreenivasan: ROBERT MATTHEWS
IS THE LEAD COUNSEL FOR K.B.R.
HE POINTS TO A LETTER FROM THE
COMMANDER OF COALTION FORCES IN
IRAQ, GENERAL DAVID PETRAEUS, TO
CONGRESS WRITTEN IN 2008 SAYING
"THERE IS AND WILL CONTINUE TO
BE A NEED FOR BURN PITS DURING
CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS."
THE GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY
OFFICE ISSUED A REPORT
CONFIRMING THAT THE TOP MILITARY
COMMANDERS APPROVED THE USE OF
THESE OPEN-AIR FIRES.
>> THE DECISIONS TO USE BURN
PITS WERE MADE BY SENIOR
MILITARY RANK ACROSS THESE WAR
THEATERS.
>> Sreenivasan: MATTHEWS SAYS
OTHER ALTERNATIVES WERE NOT
FEASIBLE.
BURYING THE REFUSE OFF BASE WAS
TOO RISKY.
BURYING IT ON BASE, WELL THERE
WASN'T ENOUGH SPACE.
THERE WAS NO RECYCLING IN IRAQ
AND AFGHANISTAN.
AND IT WAS UP TO THE LITAMIRY TO
DECIDE IF IT WANTED TO BRING IN
INCINERATORS WHICH BURN CLEANLY.
HE SAYS HISTORICALLY THE ARMY
ALWAYS BURNED ITS GARBAGE IN WAR
ZONES BECAUSE IT'S THE LEAST BAD
OPTION.
>> MORE THAN 50% OF THE BURN
PITS THAT ARE IN PLAY AROUND
IRAQ A AFGNDHANISTAN THROUGH
THAT 10 YEAR PERIOD WERE
OPERATED BY THE MILITARY ITSELF.
NOT BY K.B.R. OR OTHER
CONTRACTORS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CLASS ACTION
LAWSUIT HAS BEEN IN THE COURTS
SINCE 2008.
EARLIER THIS YEAR THE FOURTH
CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS RULED
THE CASE SHOULD GO FORWARD.
BUT K.B.R. HAS ASKED THE SUPREME
COURT TO INTERVENE.
THE COMPANY ASSERTS THAT JUST
LIKE THE GOVERNMENT HAS IMMUNITY
AND CAN'T BE SUED, IT TOO SHOULD
HAVE IMMUNITY.
>> WHERE THE UNITED STATES IS AT
WAR IN THE BATTLEFIELD ENGAGED
IN COMBATANT ACTIVITIES, THE
COMPANIES LIKE K.B.R. WHO ARE
EMBEDDED WITH THE FORCES, WHO
WERE PERFORMING MISSION CRITICAL
SERVICES, SHOULD NOT BE SUBJECT
TO THE KIND OF CLAIMS THAT HAVE
BEEN MADE HERE.
IF THE UNITED STATES IS IMMUNE
FROM SUCH CLAIMS, SO TOO SHOULD
K.B.R. AND THOSE OTHER
CONTRACTOR COMPANIES.
>> Sreenivasan: SUSAN BURKE
DISAGREES.
>> WHAT THEY'RE TRYING TO SAY IS
THAT SIMPLY BECAUSE THEY WORK
FOR THE GOVERNMENT, THEY ARE THE
GOVERNMENT.
WE KNOW THAT'S NOT THE CASE.
THIS IS A PRIVATE COMPANY THAT'S
MAKING A HUGE PROFIT MARGIN.
THEY ARE NOT THE GOVERNMENT AND
THEY DON'T DESERVE THE
GOVERNMENT IMMUNITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: BY 2010 THE
MILITARY EVENTUALLY SHIPPED IN
NEARLY 40 INCINERATORS TO IRAQ
AND 20 TO AFGHANISTAN.
ALTHOUGH THE VETERANS WE SPOKE
TO SAID THEY OFTEN WERE NOT
USED.
BESIDES THESE LEGAL ISSUES,
THERE IS DEBATE OVER HOW MUCH
BURN PITS CONTRIBUTED TO
PEOPLE'S ILLNESSES.
CRAIG POSTLEWAITE IS A TOP
OFFICIAL IN THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT'S PUBLIC HEALTH
DIVISION.
HE SAYS IT'S POSSIBLE SOME
SOLDIERS GOT SICK FROM INHALING
BURN PIT SMOKE, BUT NOT LIKELY
THAT MANY WERE AFFECTED.
>> IT WOULD BE PLAUSIBLE FOR A
SPECIFIC INDIVIDUAL TO ACQUIRE
SOME CONDITION RELATED TO BURN
PIT INHALATION DEPENDING ON HOW
CLOSE THEY WERE TO THE BURN PIT,
HOW MUCH SMOKE THEY BREATHE,
INDIVIDUAL SUSCEPTIBILITIES AND
EVEN EXPOSURE TO OTHER AIRBORNE
PARTICULATES.
WE FEEL THAT IF THERE ARE PEOPLE
WHO HAVE BEEN HARMED BY BURN PIT
EMISSIONS, THE NUMBERS ARE
FAIRLY LOW.
>> Sreenivasan: POSTLEWAITE
POINTS TO MANY OTHER POLLUTANTS
IN THE AIR THAT COULD HAVE
CAUSED VETERANS RESPIRATORY
PROBLEMS.
>> IT'S A VERY, VERY DUSTY
ENVIRONMENT.
PLUS, THE URBAN POLLUTANTS
AREN'T REGULATED WELL.
THE CARS AND TRUCKS ARE NOT
REGATEDUL SO THERE'S A LOT OF
AIRBORNE MATERIAL IN THE AIR
THAT COULD BE CONTRIBUTORY TO
LONG-TERM HEALTH EFFECTS.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT DR. ANTHONY
SZEMA SEES A DIRECT CONNECTION
BETWEEN SICK VETERANS AND THE
BURN PITS.
AT STONY BROOK SCHOOL OF
MEDICINE, WHERE HE DOES
RESEARCH, HE'S EXPOSED MICE TO
DUST FROM MILITARY BASES IN IRAQ
THAT HAD BURN PITS.
>> IN THIS HEALTHY MOUSE WE THEN
GAVE DUST FROM CAMP VICTORY IRAQ
COLLECTED IN 2007 AT THE TIME
THEY HAD BURN PITS AND THE DUST
INDUCES A LUNG INJURY.
>> Sreenivasan: SZEMA HAS A
PRIVATE PRACTICE AND IS ALSO A
DOCTOR AT NORTHPORT VETERANS
AFFAIRS MEDICAL CENTER, ALTHOUGH
THE VIEWS HE EXPRESSES HERE ARE
HIS OWN.
>> HUMANS EXPOSED TO PARTICULATE
MATTER AIR POLLUTION HAVE A
HIGHER RISK OF DEATH, PREMATURE
DEATH.
THEY HAVE HIGHER RISK OF LUNG
DISEASE SUCH AS PREMATURE
EMPHYSEMA OR CHRONIC PULMONARY
OBSTRUCTIVE DISEASE EVEN IN THE
ABSENCE OF SMOKING.
AS WELL AS ASTHMA.
BENZENE IS A CARCINOGEN SO IF
YOU BURN YOUR TRASH WITH JET
FUEL CALLED JP8 WHEN YOU BURN IN
A BURN PIT ITS BURNING AT LOW
HEAT.
AT LOW HEAT IT GENERATES MORE
PARTICLES AND HAS PRODUCTS OF
INCOMPLETE COMBUSTION.
THESE PRODUCTS ARE DANGEROUS.
IN ADDITION, IF YOU BURN PLASTIC
WATER BOTTLES AMONG THE
CHEMICALS YOU CAN RELEASE
INCLUDE A NEUROTOXIC CALLED N-
HEXANE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE THE
LAWYERS AND THE HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS DEBATE THE LEGAL
AND MEDICAL ISSUES, THE VETERANS
WE SPOKE TO COMPARE THEIR
EXPERIENCES TO SOLDIERS EXPOSED
TO AGENT ORANGE IN VIETNAM, THE
DEFOLIANT THE ARMY USED WHICH
CAUSED CANCER, NERVE DAMAGE AND
RESPIRATORY INJURY IN HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF SOLDIERS.
MARINE CORPS LIEUTENANT COLONEL
BRIAN BOWER.
>> NOBODY WENT OUT TO
PURPOSEFULLY HURT AGAIN,
SOLDIERS AIRMEN SAILORS AND
MARINES.
BUT PEOPLE ARE SUFFERING FROM
EXPOSURE TO IT AFTERWARDS.
AND THE MILITARY'S RESPONSE HAS
BEEN VERY SIMILAR TO AGENT
ORANGE.
WHICH WAS AT FIRST DENIAL,
ASSESSMENT, ACCEPTANCE OF
CULPABILITY, AND TREATMENT.
WE SEEM TO BE GOING THROUGH
THOSE SAME PHASES NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: THE VETERANS WE
SPOKE TO SAY WHILE THEY WISH
THEY WEREN'T SICK, THEY'D STILL
SERVE IN IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN
ALL OVER AGAIN.
>> I'M PROUD OF MY MILITARY
SERVICE.
I'M PROUD OF WHAT THE MILITARY
HAS DONE OVER THERE.
IF I HAD KNOWN THAT THIS WOULD
BE MY OUTCOME I STILL WOULD HAVE
CONTINUED AND DONE EXACTLY THE
SAME THING.
>> Sreenivasan: MEANWHILE,
K.B.R. SAYS IF THEY AND OTHER
BATTLEFIELD DEFENSE CONTRACTORS
ARE ALLOWED TO BE SUED, IT'S
UNLIKELY THEY WOULD DEPLOY WITH
THE MILITARY IN THE NEXT WAR.
>> IF THEY ARE EXPOSED TO THESE
LAWSUITS FOR DECADES OF
LITIGATION AND POTENTIALLY TENS
IF NOT HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS IN LIABILITIES, THEN
IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT THESE
COMPANIES ARE GOING TO THINK
TWICE ABOUT STEPPING FORWARD THE
NEXT TIME THIS COUNTRY GOES TO
WAR.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SUPREME
COURT IS NOW IN THE PROCESS OF
DECIDING WHETHER OR NOT TO HEAR
THIS CASE OR SEND IT BACK TO A
LOWER COURT WHERE IT CAN GO TO
TRIAL.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Woodruff: IF YOU WOULD LIKE
MORE ON THIS STORY GO TO OUR
WEBSITE FOR EXTENDED INTERVIEWS
AND A SLIDESHOW OF BURN PIT
PHOTOS SUBMITTED TO US BY THOSE
WHO SERVED IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
>> Ifill: NOW, ONE OF THE
NATION'S MOST FAMOUS VETERANS
TAKES A LOOK AT AMERICAN HEROES
FROM EACH OF THE NATION'S
CONFLICTS MOST LARGELY UNKNOWN
IN A NEW BOOK, "THIRTEEN
SOLDIERS: A PERSONAL HISTORY OF
AMERICA AT WAR"
THE AUTHORS ARE SENATOR JOHN
McCAIN AND HIS LONGTIME
COLLABORATOR MARK SALTER.
I SAT DOWN TODAY WITH THE
ARIZONA REPUBLICAN TO TALK ABOUT
THE BOOK, AND ALSO ABOUT WHAT TO
EXPECT FROM THE NEW REPUBLICAN
SENATE MAJORITY.
SENATOR McCAIN, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
IN YOUR LATEST BOOK YOU DECIDED
TO WRITE ABOUT 13 SOLDIERS, NOT
YOURSELF, AND FROM THE
REVOLUTIONARY WAR TO OUR LATEST
ENTERPRISES IN AFGHANISTAN AND
IRAQ.
IS THERE A LINE OF SIMILAR LATER
BETWEEN ALL OF THOSE?
>> I THINK THERE IS A SIMILAR
LATER IN THAT, NO MATTER WHERE
THEY CAME FROM OR WHAT THEIR
GENDER OR RACE WAS, THAT THEY
WERE DEDICATED TO SERVING THE
COUNTRY, SOMETIMES WITH HONOR
AND INTEGRITY AND SOMETIMES
MAYBE NOT SO MUCH, BUT WITH
COURAGE.
THEY SERVED WITH COURAGE, AND I
THINK THEY EPITO MIZEED MANY
ASPECTS OF THAT PARTICULAR
CONFLICT.
IN OTHER WORDS, PLUM MARTIN WHO
WAS IN THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR AT
15 LITERALLY ALMOST STARVED TO
DEATH.
>> Ifill: AND DIED IN POVERTY.
YES, AND WITHOUT A PENSION.
ACTUALLY, TOOK HIM 30 YEARS FOR
A PENSION, BUT COMPARE THAT WITH
MIKE MONSIEUR WHO IS A MAN WHO
SACRIFICED HIS LIFE FOR OTHERS.
IT WASN'T A QUESTION OR FOOD OR
EQUIPMENT.
IT WAS A DRAMATIC CHANGE, BUT
EACH OF THEM SERVED AND
SACRIFICED, AND ORDINARY PEOPLE
WHO DID EXTRAORDINARY THINGS.
>> Ifill: MICHAEL MONSIEUR, OF
COURSE, THREW HIMSELF ON A
GRENADE AND GOT THE MEDAL OF
HONOR.
YOU REMEMBER A TIME WHEN VIETNAM
VETERANS WEREN'T TREATED WITH
RESPECT.
HAVE YOU SEEN THAT EVOLVE OVER
TIME OR ARE WE, AS AMERICANS,
STILL BASICALLY STUCK IN A
POSITION WHERE WE SAY, THANK YOU
FOR YOUR SERVICE, BUT DON'T KNOW
WHAT ELSE TO DO WITH THAT?
>> I THINK WE'VE COME A LONG WAY
FROM JOSEPH MARTIN WHEN THEY ALL
RIGHTLY WERE DISCHARGED AND
GIVEN PIECES OF PAPER THAT THEY
COULD CONVERT INTO MONEY OR
SERVICES TO TODAY WHERE WE DO A
GREAT DEAL.
BUT I THINK THERE'S BEEN UPS AND
DOWNS.
AFTER THE VIETNAM WAR,
UNFORTUNATELY, AS YOU KNOW, MANY
PEOPLE BLAME THE VETERAN AND THE
YOUNG 18, 19-YEAR-OLD DRAFTEE.
I THINK IT'S A VERY SHAMEFUL
CHAPTER.
BUT I THINK WE'RE ALSO TRYING TO
MAKE UP FOR THAT AND I THINK WE
ARE MAKING UP FOR IT.
I SEE COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS
STEPPING UP.
I'M PROUD OF MY HOME CITY OF
PHOENIX, ARIZONA, WHERE THERE
ARE NO HOMELESS VETERANS.
THEY HAVE PROVIDED LODGING FOR
EVERY HOMELESS VETERAN IN OUR
CITY.
>> THERE'S PATRIOTISM,
PRACTICALITY.
THERE'S CERTAINLY PRACTICALITY
IN HIRING VETERANS AND THEN THE
POLITICS OF THE WHOLE THING.
>> I THINK SOMETIMES IT'S USED
FOR POLITICAL GAIN.
BUT I AM HAPPY THAT WE HAVE HAD
NOW IN THIS LAST ELECTION SOME
VETERANS INCLUDING JONI ERNST
AND SULLIVAN AND TOM COTTON WHO
SERVED RECENT CONFLICTS.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE A VETERAN
TO BE A GREAT SENATOR AND A
GREAT LEADER IN MILITARY
AFFAIRS, BUT IT DOES HELP TO
HAVE SOME VETERANS PRESENT SO
THAT THEY CAN GIVE US THE
PERSPECTIVE THAT ONLY THOSE WHO
HAVE THAT KIND OF EXPERIENCE CAN
PROVIDE.
>> Ifill: WELL, THEN TELL ME,
IF YOU HAD TO RECOMMEND ONE OF
THESE STORIES IN THIS BOOK,
WHICH ONE WOULD YOU RECOMMEND?
>> I THINK I MIGHT RECOMMEND
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, JR.
HE CAME FROM A BOSTON FAMILY,
JOINED THE HARVARD REGIMEN WHICH
WAS A MIXTURE OF HARVARD --
IVY-LEAGUE, HARVARD GRADUATES
AND GERMAN-SPEAKING AMERICANS.
HE LEARNED THE LESSONS OF WAR.
HE WAS CHANGED BY THE WAR, BUT
YET HE WENT ON TO SERVE AS A
JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES
SUPREME COURT.
ONE LITTLE ANECDOTE, EVERY DAY
AT WORK, HE HAD A TIN AMMUNITION
BOX THAT HE WOULD BRING HIS
LUNCH TO WORK WITH BECAUSE IT
ALWAYS REMINDED HIM OF THE
CONFLICT AND, OF COURSE, IT WAS
THE BLOODIEST, MOST FRACTURE
SOCIETAL CONFLICT WE HAD EVER
BEEN THROUGH AND IT DEFINED
AMERICA.
>> IN JANUARY, YOU WILL BE
CHAIRMAN OF THE ARMED SERVICES
COMMITTEE AND YOU WILL HAVE A
DIFFERENT KIND OF PLATFORM.
WE SEE PLAYING OUT EVEN TODAY
THE U.S. STRATEGY ON I.S.I.S.
ANOTHER BEHEADING OF AN AMERICAN
AID WORKING.
WHAT, AS THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE AND WITH THIS NEW
PLATFORM, WOULD YOU DO THAT WILL
BE DIFFERENT THAN WHAT'S BEING
DONE RIGHT NOW?
>> WE ARE FACING CHALLENGES
UNPRECEDENTED IN MY LIFETIME.
WE NEED TO HAVE IDEAS TO START
WITH FROM SOME OF THE SMARTEST
PEOPLE IN AMERICA.
I ALSO WANT TO GET PROVEN
MILITARY LEADERS TO COME DOWN
AND TALK DIRECTLY TO THE MEMBERS
OF OUR COMMITTEE AND CONGRESS SO
THEY CAN TELL US WHAT OUR
CHALLENGES ARE.
>> Ifill: WHAT IS THE VALUE IN
BRINGING PEOPLE FROM PAST
ADMINISTRATIONS TO ADVISE THIS
UDMINISTRATION BECAUSE YOU DON'T
>> I TNK TY LEARNED THE
LESSONS.
THEY'VE LIVED IT FROM THAT SIDE
OF THE RIVER AND THEY KNOW WHAT
THEIR CHALLENGES ARE, BUT ALSO
THEY HAVE A GREAT GRASP OF THE
OVERALL SITUATION IN WAR.
MANY OF THESE NEW MEMBERS,
PARTICULARLY, HAVE NEVER BEEN
INVOLVED WITH THE BIG PICTURE
ISSUES.
>> Ifill: I GUESS WHAT I'M
CURIOUS ABOUT, THE PUSHBACK THAT
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFERS IS THE
REPUBLICANS ARE CRITICAL BUT
THEY DON'T HAVE THEIR OWN
SOLUTION.
>> THAT'S INTERESTING TO HEAR
BECAUSE EVERYTHING THAT LINDSEY
GRAHAM AND I AND JOE LIEBERMAN
SAID WOULD HAPPEN, HAPPENED.
WE SAID A LONG TIME AGO, WE'LL
NEED A LOT MORE BOOTS ON THE
GROUND.
THE PRESIDENT, JUST 1,500 MORE.
I GUARANTEE THEY WILL NEED MORE
AND THEY WILL NEED TO ARM THE
FREE SYRIAN ARMY AND IGNORE THE
BOUNDARIES BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES.
WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS A GRADUAL
ESCALATION WHICH THEN THE
ESCALATION LOSES MUCH OF ITS
IMPACT.
WHEN WE DECIDED WE WERE GOING TO
BOMB I.S.I.S., WE GAVE THEM A
WEEK'S WARNING.
I MEAN, IT'S CRAZY.
BUT EVERYTHING THAT WE HAVE
PRESCRIBED THAT NEEDED TO BE
DONE, IF IT HAD BEEN DONE, WE
WOULDN'T BE WHERE WE ARE TODAY.
>> Ifill: FOR THE FINAL TWO
YEARS OF THE PRESIDENCY, HAS IT
BEEN HURT BECAUSE OF THREATS OF
EXECUTIVE ACTION?
>> I THINK IT'S HURT THE
ENVIRONMENT AND SHOULD BE
CHALLENGED IN COURT BECAUSE THE
PRESIDENT FOR MONTHS SAID HE
DIDN'T HAVE THAT KIND OF
AUTHORITY AND NOW HE IS
EXERCISING THE KIND OF AUTHORITY
THAT HE SAID HE DIDN'T HAVE, AND
I THINK IT'S CLEARLY
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
BUT, FRANKLY, SHUTTING DOWN THE
GOVERNMENT IS NOT THE ANSWER.
>> Ifill: YOU WILL HAVE TO
FIGHT THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
FIGHT AGAIN, AREN'T YOU?
>> I HOPE WE WILL PREVENT IT
FROM HAPPENING, BOTH SENATOR
MCCONNELL AND SPEAKER BOEHNER
HAVE SAID THAT IS NOT THE
SOLUTION SO I HOPE WE CAN
PREVAIL.
>> Ifill: SENATOR McCAIN,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GEB.
>> Ifill: MY CONVERSATION WITH
SENATOR McCAIN CONTINUES
ONLINE WHERE WE DISCUSS THE
VALUE OF MILITARY AND CIVILIAN
PUBLIC SERVICE.
>> Woodruff: THE NATIONAL
FOOTBALL LEAGUE HAS BEEN HIT
HARD BY CONTROVERSIAL HEADLINES
RECENTLY, BUT TV RATINGS ON
GAME-DAY HAVEN'T SUFFERED YET.
YESTERDAY, AFTER THE ACTION
FINISHED ON THE FIELD, THE
FEDERAL DRUG ENFORCEMENT
ADMINISTRATION LAUNCHED SURPRISE
RAIDS TO SEE IF SEVERAL TEAMS
WERE IMPROPERLY USING PAIN
MEDICATION.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE.
>> Brown: "THE WASHINGTON
POST" RECORDED DEA AGENTS
CONDUCTED SEARCHES OF AT LEAST
THREE TEAMS, THE SAN FRANCISCO
49ers, THE BUCCANEERS AND
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS.
THEY WERE LOOKING INTO THE USE
OF POSSIBLE ABUSE OF PAIN
KILLING DRUGS IN A LAWSUIT
BROUGHT BY FORMER PLAYERS.
FIRST OF ALL, WHAT EXACTLY WERE
THE AGENTS LOOKING FOR?
>> WELL, THEY WERE LOOKING FOR
INSTANCES OF INCONSISTENCIES IN
PAPERWORK, IMPROPER PAPER YRK,
LACK OF PAPERWORK.
UNWE ARE THE CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES ACTED, A PHYSICIAN IN
CALIFORNIA HAS TO HAVE THE
PROPER REGISTRATION IN NEW YORK
TO DISPEPS PRESCRIPTION DRUGS IF
HE COMES HERE AND ATTEMPTS TO
TREAT A PARENT AND HAND THEM
NARCOTIC PAINKILLERS WHICH IS
THE SORT OF THING THAT THE DEA
IS LOOKING INTO WITH THE N.F.L.
>> Brown: SO THEY'RE ALL TIED
TO THIS CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT.
WHAT ARE THE FORMER PLAYERS
SAYING HAPPENED THAT LED TO THIS
INVESTIGATION?
>> WELL, WHAT TRIGGERED THE
INVESTIGATION WAS A LAWSUIT BY
ABOUT 1300 FORMER N.F.L.
PLAYERS, SOME RECENTLY RETIRED,
WHO ALLEGE IN THEIR LAWSUIT THAT
THE N.F.L. HAS A PATTERN OF
PRESCRIPTION DRUG ABUSE THAT
DOCTORS AND TRAINERS HAVE
PRESCRIBED MEDICATIONS IN
EXCESSIVE APARTMENTS OVER
EXCESSIVE PERIODS OF TIME, THAT
THEY HAVE HANDED OUT MEDICATION
WITHOUT PRESCRIPTIONS,
UNLABELED, THOSE SORTS OF
THINGS.
AS ONE PLAINTIFF ATTORNEY SAID,
THEY'VE ACCUSED THE N.F.L. OF
HANDING OUT THESE NARCOTIC
PAINKILLERS LIKE HALLOWEEN
CANDY.
>> Brown: THEY PICKED THREE
TEAMS.
DO WE KNOW WHY AND IF IT'S
LIMITED TO THOSE TEAMS OR IS
THIS FOR THE WHOLE WEEK?
>> "THE WASHINGTON POST"
UNDERSTANDING BASED ON OUR
REPORTING IS THAT THEY'RE
LOOKING AT THE ENTIRE LEAGUE.
THIS IS NOT RESTRICTED TO THE
TEAMS THAT WERE INSPECTED
YESTERDAY.
WE CAN ADD THE CINCINNATI
BENGALS AND DETROIT LIONS TO THE
LIST SO WE KNOW OF FIVE TEAMS.
WE BELIEVE THERE'S ANOTHER TEAM
OR TWO OUT THERE THAT MAY HAVE
BEEN INSPECTED OR LOOKED AT IN
THIS PHASE OF THE INVESTIGATION
BUT WE CAN'T NAME THOSE.
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT THIS
IS A PIECE OR A STEP IN LARGER
DEA INVESTIGATION INTO
PRESCRIPTION DRUG USAGE IN THE
N.F.L.
>> Brown: IS PART OF IT A REAL
SURPRISE TO THE TEAMS?
HOW DID THEY RESPOND?
>> WELL, I THINK IT WAS INTENDED
AS A SURPRISE TO THE TEAMS.
WHETHER OR NOT THEY GOT SOME
SORT OF TIP OR HAD SOME SORT OF
KNOWLEDGE, I DON'T WANT.
BUT THE DEA BASICALLY SET OUT TO
POP QUIZ THOSE TEAMS AND THEIR
MEDICAL STAFFS YESTERDAY, AS
THEY MOVED THROUGH STADIUMS AND
AIRPORTS.
THE IDEA WAS TO EXAMINE A GROUP
OF TEAMS THAT WAS ACTUALLY
TRAVELING ON A SUNDAY TO LOOK AT
THEIR PRACTICES AND THEIR
APERPWO
COMPLIANCE.
AND LET ME JUST INTERJECT THAT
THE NEW ORLEANS DEA SPOKESPERSON
DOWN IN NEW ORLEANS ISSUED A
STATEMENT THIS AFTERNOON THAT
THE CINCINNATI BENGALS WERE
LOOKED AT AN AND APPEARED TO BEN
COMPLIANCE.
>> Brown: YOU'V EVERYONE KNOWS S
A CULTURE OF VIOLENCE AND PAIN.
IT'S NOT A SURPRISE PLAYERS ARE
USING THESE KIND OF DRUGS AND
THERE HAVE BEEN ISSUES OF
GETTING BACK ON THE FIELD TOO
EARLY.
IN THAT CONTEXT, IS ALL OF THIS
A SURPRISE OR IS THIS REALLY
FOCUSING ON THE LEGALITY OF
WHAT'S DONE?
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S A SURPRISE
THAT N.F.L. PLAYERS USE NATIONAL
SECURITY PAINKILLERS.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A SURPRISE
THAT THERE HAVE BEEN LOOSE
PRACTICES IN THE LEAGUE.
THE DEA HAS LOOKED AT INDIVIDUAL
TEAMS BEFORE YESTERDAY.
THERE WAS A CASE A COUPLE OF
YEARS AGO WITH THE SAN DIEGO
CHARGERS WHERE THEY LOOKED INTO
THEIR PRESCRIPTION PRACTICES,
THE SAME WITH THE NEW ORLEANS
SAINTS.
BUT THE DEA UP TO THIS POINT HAD
NOT CONDUCTED A COMPREHENSIVE
INVESTIGATION INTO THE
LEAGUE-WIDE PRACTICES CONCERNING
PAINKILLERS.
SO THAT'S WHAT'S NEW HERE.
YOU KNOW, THE INTERESTING
QUESTION IS, YOU KNOW, N.F.L.
POSITIONS ARE CONFRONTED WITH A
REAL DILEMMA.
WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE AND THE
FINE LINE BETWEEN TREATING AN
INJURY AND MASKING AN INJURY?
WHAT IS THE FINE LINE BETWEEN,
YOU KNOW, ADMINISTERING
PAINKILLERS IN ORDER TO RELIEVE
PAIN AND ADMINISTERING NATIONALC
PAINKILLERS TO ENABLE A PLAYER
TO GO BACK OUT AND RE-INJURE
HIMSELF FURTHER?
THE QUESTION FOR THE DEA IS
THEY'RE CONCERNED ABOUT IS THE
N.F.L. CULTURE OF DRUG USE AND
NARCOTIC PAINKILLER,
PRESCRIPTION DRUG USE CREATING
AIL DISTRICT?
THAT'S THE QUESTION THE DEA IS
MOST INTERESTED IN.
>> Brown: VERY BRIEFLY, IS THE
N.F.L. COOPERATING?
WHAT'S THEIR ATTITUDE?
>> YES, THE N.F.L. ISSUED A
STATEMENT LAST NIGHT THAT THEIR
TEAMS HAD COOPERATED WITH THE
DEA AND, TO THEIR KNOWLEDGE,
THERE WERE NO IRREGULARITIES
FOUND IN THE STEPS CONDUCTED
YESTERDAY BY THE DEA.
THE DEA OBVIOUSLY IS NOT TIPPING
ITS HAND TO WHAT IT REALLY WAS
AFTER YESTERDAY OR THE OVERALL,
YOU KNOW, SCOPE OF WHAT IT'S
LOOKING AT OR, YOU KNOW, WHO
IT'S LOOKING AT IN PARTICULAR.
THEY'RE HOLDING THOSE CARDS
PRETTY CLOSE TO THE VEST.
>> SALLY JENKINS OF "THE
WASHINGTON POST."
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, HOW
CLIMATE CHANGE MAY BE AFFECTING
LIFE IN ALASKA AS WE KNOW IT.
AND THE CAPTIVATING IMAGES WE
SEE THERE FROM ICE TO MARINE
LIFE.
NEWSHOUR SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT
MILES O'BRIEN WENT THERE TO SEE
FOR HIMSELF.
>> Reporter: ALASKA MAY SEEM
LIKE A PLACE WHERE THINGS CHANGE
QUICKLY.
THE NATURAL BEAUTY IS SET IN
STONE.
IT IS AS PREDICTABLE AS THE
CARIBOU BESIDE THE ROAD.
MAKE NO MISTAKE, THINGS ARE
CHANGING HERE QUICKLY AND NOT
FOR THE BETTER.
ALASKA IS AT THE FRONTIER OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
SCIENTISTS ARE SCRAMBLING TO TRY
TO UNDERSTAND IT.
>> WE KNOW THAT THE ARCTIC IS
WARMING MORE RAPIDLY THAN MOST
OTHER PLACES ON EARTH.
>> Reporter: TO CATCH UP WITH
UNIVERSITY OF MAINE
PALEONTOLOGIST TROY AND HIS TEAM
WE HOPPED ON A PLANE RIGGED WITH
SKIS THAT LANDED ON THE RUTH
GLACIER IN THE HEART OF THE
DENALI PARK.
>> MOST GLACIERS ARE RETREATING.
WE WOULD LIKE TO PREDICT WITH
BETTER ARCK ARCKY -- ACCURACY WT
WILL HAPPEN BUT IT'S HARD TO
IMAGINE THEY WON'T LOSE MASS IN
THIS AREA.
THE QUESTION IS HOW FAST.
>> Reporter: THE ANSWER IS
UNKNOWABLE IF THEY DON'T KNOW
HOW MUCH SITES IS HERE NOW.
>> THIS SPECIFIC STUDY IS TO
COME UP WITH ICE DEPTH
MEASUREMENT ACROSS THE GLACIER.
>GLACIER.
>> Reporter: SETH CAMPBELL IS
A PHYSICIST WITH THE CORPS OF
ENGINEERS.
HE AND ABBY BRADFORD SPENT LONG
DAYS ON SKIS PUINGLL A GROUND
PENETRATING RADAR UP AND DOWN
AND ACROSS THE GLACIER.
>> A PULSE IS SENT THROUGH THE
CABLE, DOWN THROUGH THE ICE,
REFLECTS OFF THE BEDROCK,
RETURNS BACK TO THE SURFACE AND
RETURNS AND IS RECORDED BY THIS
RECEIVER CABLE.
YOU KNOW HOW FAST RADIO TRAVELS
THROUGH THE ICE, SO BASED ON HOW
LONG IT TAKES FOR THE SIGNAL TO
BE TRANSFERRED AND RECEIVED WE
CAN TELL HOW DEEP THE ICE IS.
SAMPLE TWO SHOULD COME FROM A
DEPTH OF 50 CENTIMETERS.
>> Reporter: THEY DUG A PIT
11.5 FEET DEEP AND HAVE ABBY
REPEL DOWN TO TAKE READINGS.
>> THIS IS GREAT!
GO!
>> Reporter: DUTIFUL REPORTER
THAT I AM, I WENT IN.
>> SO THIS IS JUST ONE LAYER,
ONE ANNUAL LAYER.
THIS IS THIS YEAR'S SNOWFALL.
AND THEN RIGHT WHAT WE'RE
STANDING ON, WHERE THIS STOPS,
COVERED WITH KNOW NOW, BUT
THERE'S AN ICE LAYER.
>> Reporter: AND YOU KNOW
THAT'S THE PREVIOUS SEASON?
>> THAT'S THE PREVIOUS SEASON,
YEP.
>> Reporter: SHE WEIGHS A
VOLUME OF SNOW AT VARIOUS DEPTHS
TO DETERMINE THE DENSITY.
THE HOPE IS THE LAYERING THEY
SEE IN THE PITS MATCHES THE
RADAR RETURNS.
>> THERE'S THOUSANDS OF GLACIERS
IN ALASKA AND VERY FEW HAVE HAD
DATA GATHERED ON THEM.
SO WE'RE HOPING TO PIECE THAT
PUZZLE TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: GETTING BACK TO
THE SURFACE MIGHT HAVE BEEN EASY
FOR HER, BUT FOR ME, WELL, LET'S
JUST SAY I DIDN'T SCORE ANY
STYLE POINTS.
LATER IN CAMP, KARL DUG ME A
SHALLOWER PIT.
>> OF COURSE, SINCE WE'RE GOING
DEEPER, WE'RE GOING BACK IN
TIME.
>> Reporter: A THIN WALL
BACKLIT BY THE SUN.
THE KEY IS THE LAYERS OF SNOW
AND, MOST IMPORTANTLY, ICE,
PROOF TO HAVE THE MELT.
>> LAYERS IN THE SNOW PACK ARE
VERY ANALOGOUS TO TREE RINGS.
AS WE GO THROUGH THE LAYERS,
THESE ARE GOING BACK IN TIME OF
THE GLACIER AND WE GET DEEPER
AND DEEPER.
>> Reporter: LAST SEASON THEY
WENT MUCH DEEPER DRILLING OUT
THIS LONG ICE CORE A FEW MILES
AWAY.
IT IS NATURE'S ANCIENT HISTORY
BOOK FOR THIS GLACIER.
>> SO FOR THE PAST 40 OR 50
YEARS, A NUMBER OF ICE LAYERS
THAT HAVE FORMED EACH SUMMER HAS
BEEN INCREASING AND, SO, WE
INTERPRET THAT AS MEANING THAT
THE SUMMERTIME TEMPERATURES IN
THIS AREA HAVE GRADUALLY BEEN
WARMING OVER THE PAST COUPLE OF
DECADES.
>> Reporter: THE VAST MAJORITY
OF GLACIER ICE ON THE PLANET
LIES IN GREENLAND AND
NTARACTICA, SO NO SURPRISE
THAT'S WHERE MOST TO HAVE THE
ATTENTION AND SCIENTIFIC EFFORT
IS.
BUT THE PEOPLE WHO COME HERE TO
THE MOUNTAINS AND THE GLACIERS
SAY THE ICE HERE SHOULDN'T BE
OVERLOOKED.
>> THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT
ALASKA IS A LOT OF THE GLACIERS
HAVE DRASTIC CHANGES CAUSED BY
SMALL TEMPERATURE CHANGES.
>> Reporter: 550 MILES NORTH
OFF THE SEA ICE ON BARROW, THE
NOTION THAT ALASKA ROCKS AT A
TIPPLE POINT IS NOT JUST
ACADEMIC, IT'S A MATTER OF
SURVIVAL FOR A PROUD CULTURE.
THE 2005 FILM "THE ESKIMO AND
THE WHALE" TELLS THE STORY OF
THE PEOPLE TRYING TO PRESERVE
THEIR HUNTING TRADITION.
>> THE ICE IS SHRINKING.
WE HAVE A LOT OF CRACKS IN THE
ICE SO WE HAVE TO WATCH THEM A
LOT MORE.
WHEN I WAS LITTLE, THESE ICE
PILES HERE, THEY WERE TEN TIMES
BIGGER.
>> Reporter: NELSON IS CAPTAIN
OF A WHALE HUNTING TEAM.
THEY RELY ON STABLE, THICK ICE
TO HARPOON THE 25 BOWHEAD WHALES
THEY'RE ALLOWED TO TAKE EACH
YEAR FOR FOOD.
NELSON WORKS AS A GUIDE FOR
SCIENTISTS FOCUSED ON THE SEA
ICE AND THE OTHER END OF THE
FOOD CHAIN, THE TINY
LIGHT-SENSITIVE ORGANISMS THAT
LIVE IN THE ICE.
>> TEMPERATURES EFFECTS UP HERE
AND ICE EXTENDS UP HERE,
ACTUALLY HAS PROFOUND EFFECTS ON
THE MARINE COMMUNITY UNDERNEATH
THE ICE.
>> Reporter: ECOLOGIST CRAIG
IS WITH LAMONT DOHERTY
OBSERVATORY, COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY.
HE AND HIS TEAM DO A LOT OF
CORING AS WELL, MEASURING THE
TEMPERATURE OF THE ICE AT
10-FEET INTERVALS.
THEY DROP CAMERAS THROUGH THE
HOLES.
>> WHAT DO YOU HOPE TO SEE?
LOOK AT BOTTOM TO SEE THE
PIGMENTATION, THIS IS ALL ALGAE.
>> Reporter: DURING THE
WINTER, THE ALGAE HIBERNATES IN
THE ICE, BUT IN THE SPRING IT
BLOOMS AND DROPS INTO THE WATER.
WHEN AND HOW FAST THAT HAPPENS
DEPENDS ON HOW MUCH LIGHT GETS
THROUGH THE ICE.
THAT IS CHANGING AS THE ICE
SHRINKS, GETS THINNER AND IS
COVERED BY LESS SNOW.
>> SO WHAT WE'RE REALLY
INTERESTED IN IS THEN FINDING
OUT WHAT ROLE THIS MATERIAL
PLAYS IN THE TOTAL DIET OF THESE
ORGANISMS.
IT'S REALLY HARD TO UNDERSTAND
THE IMPACT OF THE LOSS OF SEA
ICE FOR -- WITHOUT ACTUALLY
UNDERSTANDING WHAT IMPORTANCE IT
HAS TOWARD THE UNDERLYING MARINE
SYSTEMS.
>> Reporter: ALGAE IS A
PRODUCER OF THE FOOD CHAIN.
MARINE BIOLOGIST ANDY.
>> WE KNOW IT STARTS IN THE ICE,
GROWS IN THE ICE, GETS RELEASED
IN THE ICE, ENDS UP IN THE
WATER, SOME SINKS TO THE BOTTOM.
SO THE NEXT QUESTION IS WHO'S
EATING IT?
>> Reporter: THEY ANALYZE ALL
MANNER OF SMALL CREATURES TO SEE
WHAT THEY'RE EATING AND BY
ANALYZING THEIR TISSUE, WHAT
PROVIDES THEM THE MOST
NUTRITION.
AS THEY GATHER DATA, THEY ARE
WORKING THEIR WAY UP THE CHAIN.
ON THIS DAY THEY NETTED A
JELLYFISH.
>> JELLYFISH!
>> Reporter: CAUSE ENOUGH FOR
A SCIENCE NERD HAPPY DANCE ON
THE ICE.
BUT BENEATH THE SURFACE HERE,
THERE ARE GRAVE CONCERNS ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE SEA ICE IS
DRAMATICALLY DIMINISHED.
>> LARGE MARINE ANIMALS -- SEALS
AND BELUGA WHALES AND BOWHEAD
WHALES, THE POLAR BEARS -- ALL
THOSE ORGANISMS ARE HERE BECAUSE
IT IS AN INCREDIBLY PRODUCTIVE
ENVIRONMENT AND CAN SUPPORT THE
REALLY BIG ORGANISMS BECAUSE
THERE ARE A LOT OF ALGAE AT THE
BASE OF THE FOOD CHAIN HERE.
>> Reporter: THE AMOUNT OF
SNOWFALL, THE DEPTH OF THE ICE
SUPPORTS A FINELY-HONED BALANCE
THAT ULTIMATELY SUSTAINS THE TOP
OF THE FOOD CHAIN.
HERE A SINGLE DEGREE OF CHANGE
ACROSS THE LINE BETWEEN ICE AND
WATER IS CHANGING EVERYTHING.
MILES O'BRIEN, PBS "NewsHour",
BARROW, ALASKA.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY, THE
PARENTS OF AN AMERICAN AID
WORKER, BEHEADED BY ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS, URGED PRAYERS
FOREACE P.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
INSISTED THE UNITED STATES WILL
NOT BE INTIMIDATED.
AND MISSOURI GOVERNOR JAY NIXON
ACTIVATED THE NATIONAL GUARD, IN
CASE THERE IS NEW TROUBLE IN
FERGUSON.
A GRAND JURY WILL DECIDE ANY DAY
WHETHER TO INDICT A WHITE
POLICEMAN FOR KILLING A BLACK
TEEN-AGER, MICHAEL BROWN.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW, MORE INTERNATIONAL
STUDENTS ARE ENROLLED IN
AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES THAN EVER
BEFORE.
WE EXAMINE THE INCREASINGLY
GLOBALIZED U.S. COLLEGE CAMPUS,
THAT'S ON THE RUNDOWN.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT HOW
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT IS TRYING TO
CRIPPLE THE ISLAMIC STATE BY
CUTTING OFF ITS MONEY.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING, FOR ALL
OF US HERE ATHE T PBS NEWSHOUR,
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.